[docs-beta] ingesting data with dagster (#23930)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/docs-beta/docs/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingesting-data.md

This guide explains how to use Dagster for data ingestion.

Note that this guide focuses on batch data ingestion, because streaming data ingestion doesn't typically rely on an orchestrator to kick off or coordinate computations. However, streaming data assets can still be represented in Dagster for lineage purposes.

## What you'll learn

- How Dagster helps with data ingestion
- How to integrate Dagster with different data ingestion tools
- How to write custom data ingestion pipelines

<details>
  <summary>Prerequisites</summary>
- Familiarity with [asset definitions](/concepts/assets)
</details>

## How Dagster helps with data ingestion

As a data orchestrator, Dagster helps with data ingestion in the following ways:
- It can automatically kick off computations that ingest data.
- It can coordinate data ingestion with downstream data transformation, for example to rebuild a set of dbt models after the upstream data they depend on is updated.
- It can represent ingested data assets in its data asset graph, which enables understanding what ingested data exists, how ingested data is used, and where data is ingested from.

> Note that this guide focuses on batch data ingestion, because streaming data ingestion doesn't typically rely on an orchestrator to kick off or coordinate computations. However, streaming data assets can still be represented in Dagster for lineage purposes.

Reviewer: This is a dupe now that ya moved it up

## What you'll learn

- How Dagster helps with data ingestion
- How to integrate Dagster with different data ingestion tools
- How to write custom data ingestion pipelines

<details>
  <summary>Prerequisites</summary>
- Familiarity with [asset definitions](/concepts/assets)
</details>

## How Dagster helps with data ingestion

As a data orchestrator, Dagster helps with data ingestion in the following ways:
- It can automatically kick off computations that ingest data.
- It can coordinate data ingestion with downstream data transformation, for example to rebuild a set of dbt models after the upstream data they depend on is updated.
- It can represent ingested data assets in its data asset graph, which enables understanding what ingested data exists, how ingested data is used, and where data is ingested from.

Note that this guide focuses on batch data ingestion, because streaming data ingestion doesn't typically rely on an orchestrator to kick off or coordinate computations. However, streaming data assets can still be represented in Dagster for lineage purposes.

## Orchestrate a data ingestion tool

> Dagster integrates with several tools that are purpose-built for data ingestion. These tools roughly fall into two main categories:

Author: Good point. I realized we don't really need these two separate sub-sections, so I consolidated into a single section.

- Hosted data ingestion services.
- Embedded data ingestion libraries.

### Hosted data ingestion services

Hosted data ingestion services are tools that provide UIs for configuring and managing syncs between data sources and tables in a data warehouse. Dagster's integrations with these tools help you represent these ingested tables as assets in the Dagster asset graph. And they help you kick off asset materializations that use the REST APIs exposed by these tools to trigger syncs.

Dagster provides two integrations with two hosted data ingestion services:
- [Fivetran](/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingest-data-with-fivetran)
- [Airbyte](/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingest-data-with-airbyte)

### Embedded data ingestion libraries

> Embedded data ingestion libraries are tools that enable using code or configuration to manage syncs between data sources and tables in a data warehouse. The source of truth on syncs is typically in a git repository, rather than an external hosted service. Dagster's integrations with these tools help you represent these ingested tables as assets in the Dagster asset graph. And they help you kick off asset materializations that trigger syncs.
> 
> Dagster provides two integrations with embedded data ingestion libraries:
> - [Sling](/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingest-data-with-sling)
> - [DLT](/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingest-data-with-dlt)

Reviewer: Same suggestion here as I had for the hosted section. I'm not sure you actually need the `Git repositories are...` sentence, as it being in code or configuration sort of implies it. I'm not sure we need to be that specific.

```suggestion
Unlike hosted data ingestion tools, embedded options use code or configuration to manage syncs. Git repositories are typically the source of truth rather than a hosted service.

With Dagster, you can [description of thing you can do with these libraries]

Dagster currently integrates with:

- [Sling](/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingest-data-with-sling)
- [DLT](/guides/ingestion-and-transformation/ingest-data-with-dlt)
```

## Orchestrate a data ingestion tool

Dagster integrates with several tools that are purpose-built for data ingestion. These tools roughly fall into two main categories:
- Hosted data ingestion services.
- Embeddable data ingestion libraries.

### Hosted data ingestion services

Dagster provides two integrations with two hosted data ingestion services: Fivetran and Airbyte.

With a hosted data ingestion service, the set of data sources to ingest into the data platform is defined inside the service. Dagster's integrations with these services invoke their REST APIs to find out about the set of data assets that they ingest and load those asset definitions into Dagster's asset graph. The "materialize" action on these Dagster asset definitions invokes REST APIs provided by these services to ingest the latest data from the source.

To learn how to use Dagster to orchestrate a hosted data ingestion service, follow the link for that service above.

### Embeddable data ingestion libraries

> With an embeddable data ingestion library, the set of data sources to ingest into the data platform is defined using files that are typically managed inside the same git repository as other Dagster pipelines. Dagster's integrations with these libraries invokes them to interpret these files and load the data assets defined in them into Dagster's asset graph. The "materialize" action on these Dagster asset definitions invokes the library to ingest the latest data from the source.

Reviewer 2: Would simplify this further:

```suggestion
Embedded data ingestion libraries are managed alongside the same code as your Dagster pipeline.
```

Dagster provides two integrations with embeddable data ingestion libraries: Sling and DLT.

To learn how to use Dagster to orchestrate a hosted data ingestion service, follow the link for that library above.

## Write a custom data ingestion pipeline

It's also common to write code in a language like Python to ingest data into a data platform.

For example, if there's a CSV file on the internet of counties, and you want to load it into your Snowflake data warehouse as a table, you might directly define an asset that represents that table in your warehouse. The asset's materialization function fetches data from the internet and loads it into that table.

> ```python

Reviewer 2: This example should be self-contained and fully runnable. 
Concept/Explanation pages don't have this constraint however, so using code to explain concepts is totally fine in those sections.

Author: Yeah this was just a placeholder. Do we have a general strategy for code examples where an external service is involved? I.e. the most realistic thing to put here would be something that downloads a file from S3 and writes it to a table in Snowflake, but most readers aren't going to have an S3 bucket with that particular file and a Snowflake instance.

Reviewer: Pedram can weigh in, but I think that's fine. It should just be runnable for those that do have those things.

Reviewer 2: I think it's fine for the file not to exist, expecting a user to replace a path before an example runs is totally fine when dealing with cloud service examples.
